---
id: library-intro
title: Welcome to The Library
sidebar_label: Introduction
slug: /
---

## A growing knowledge base

There have been **over 3,000 distinct jobs written** for the OpenFn platform,
driving efficiency across the social sector. These jobs have run millions of
times, connecting and automating critical technologies like CommCare, DHIS2,
Salesforce, Kobo Toolbox, and more.

**90% of at-scale OpenFn customers make their jobs publicly available** so that
other organizations can learn from their implementations, yet we’re still
constantly asked to find examples of jobs that “create DHIS2 entities from
CommCare cases” or “initiate payments when Kobo submissions arrive”.

The Job Library is our attempt to make this vast pool of real-world experience
available to everyone, automatically collecting and organizing non-sensitive job
scripts from this diverse community of social sector integration experts to make
data integration safer, faster, and more scalable than ever before.

## How can you contribute?

In the **Project Settings** page for one of your OpenFn.org projects, select
flip the **"Job library sharing"** switch and you're good to go! There will be a
slight delay between the time you share your jobs and the time the appear on
this site, but in about half an hour, at most, you'll be able to find your
published jobs here.

N.B.: If you want to share a project, but **keep certain jobs private**, you can
do that too. Navigate to the job in question and click the administrative
settings cog in the top right corner (the same place you'd disable "console.log"
statements) and select "Make this job private."

## What's next?

We're planning to expand both the API and the library searching/browsing
experience in the future. We'd like to include information on whether or not
jobs have been running recently, with what frequency they're failing or
succeeding, and we'd like to provide a way for users to "upvote" or "downvote"
certain jobs (think StackOverflow!)

All of these things need to be carefully planned out with the larger OpenFn
community, as we aim to keep the privacy of our platform users sacrosanct.
